we can all have a bad night of sleep and
that's
perfectly normal but how can we try to
improve both the quantity and the
quality of our sleep
[Music]
here are six scientifically grounded
tips for better sleep the first tip
is regularity go to bed at the same time
and wake up at the same time regularity
is
king and it will actually anchor your
sleep
and improve both the quantity and the
quality
no matter whether it's the weekday or
the weekend
or even if you've had a bad night of
sleep and the reason is because
deep within your brain you actually have
a master
24-hour clock it expects regularity
and works best under conditions of
regularity
including the control of your sleep wake
schedule
many of us use an alarm to wake up but
very few of us use
a tibetan alarm and that's something
that can be helpful
the next tip is temperature keep it cool
it turns out that your brain and your
body need to drop their core temperature
by about one degree celsius or around
two to three degrees fahrenheit in order
to initiate sleep
and then to stay asleep and this is the
reason that you will
always find it easier to fall asleep in
a room that's too
cold than too hot so the current
recommendation
is to aim for a bedroom temperature of
around about
65 degrees fahrenheit or a little over
18 degrees celsius it sounds cold
but cold it must be the next tip
is darkness we are a dark deprived
society
and in fact we need darkness
specifically in the evening
to trigger the release of a hormone
called melatonin
a melatonin helps regulate the healthy
timing of our sleep in the last hour
before bed
try to stay away from all of those
computer screens and
tablets and phones dim down half the
lights in your house
you'd actually be quite surprised at how
sleepy
that can make you feel if you'd like you
can wear an eye mask
or you can have blackout shades and that
will help best
regulate that critical sleep hormone of
melatonin
the next tip is walk it out don't stay
in bed
awake for long periods of time and the
general rule of thumb
is if you've been trying to fall asleep
and it's been 25 minutes or so
or you've woken up and you can't get
back to sleep after 25 minutes
the recommendation is to get out of bed
and go and do
something different and the reason is
because your brain
is an incredibly associative device the
brain has
learned the association that the bed is
this
trigger of wakefulness and we need to
break that association
and by getting out of bed you can go and
do something else
only return to bed when you're sleepy
and in that way gradually your brain
will relearn the association
that your bed is this place of sound
and consistent sleep the fifth tip is
something that we've actually already
spoken about in detail
in this series which is the impact of
alcohol
and caffeine so a good rule of thumb
here is to try to stay away from
caffeine in the afternoon and in the
evening and certainly
try not to go to bed too tipsy the final
tip
have a wind down routine i think
many of us in the modern world we expect
to be able to dive into bed at night
switch off the light and we think that
sleep is
also just like a light switch that we
should immediately be able to fall
asleep
well unfortunately sleep isn't quite
like that for most of us
sleep as a physiological process
is much more similar to landing a plane
it takes time for your brain to
gradually descend
down onto the firm bedrock
of good sleep in the last 20 minutes
before bed or the last half an hour
even the last hour disengage from your
computer and your
phone and try to do something relaxing
find out
whatever works for you and when you have
found it
stick to that routine the last thing i
should note
is that if you are suffering from a
sleep disorder
for example from insomnia or sleep apnea
then these tips aren't necessarily going
to help you
if i was your sports coach i could give
you all of these tips to
improve your performance but if you have
a broken ankle
it's not going to make a difference we
have to treat the broken ankle
first before we can get back to
improving the quality of your
performance and it's the same way with
sleep
so if you think you have a sleep
disorder just go and speak with your
doctor that's the best piece of advice
where do we stand then in all of this
conversation
about sleep well i think the evidence
is clear we can think of sleep almost
like
a life support system in fact
some may even call sleep a superpower